get a significant pay raise for the teachers in the
amount of 28.5% at the upper level. It did take some
convincing of the Senate when we got the
conference committee to hold on to that amount.
What we were able to do did not help me much with the
school teachers when I met with them after the
session.
By 1981, the Texas State Teachers Association,
which was the strongest arm of the teachers
associations, Berkeley in Texas, had become
aligned with the National Education
Association. New alignment was forced upon them
by taking a succession of votes, I understand
about four,
to join the National Education Association. The
first three votes that the Texas State Teachers
Association took, I understand they turned down
joining the National Education Association, and
it wasn't until the fourth vote that they finally
succumbed. As a result, by 1981,
competing teachers association had emerged and
the speaker's motive was to work with and help this
association in its accomplishments during the
session. The speaker had not kept me informed on
his motives and strategy with regards to teacher
pay.
And as a result, I had initially killed his
proposal. Chairman of the committee, I
controlled the agenda and with a little finesse
was able to bring the proposal back before the
committee. and get it passed for as much as a 28.5%
increase, which the competing teachers
association had requested. The chairman of the
senate conference committee was not predisposed
to provide as much salary increase as the house had
in its bill when we got to the conference
committee. But I was able to prevail upon the
chairman of the Senate Finance Committee to
accept the House proposal and provide for a larger
teacher pay increase than was in the Senate bill. I
was naive enough to think that with my support on
more than one occasion for a significant pay raise
that I might stand in good stead with the Texas
State Teachers Association. but failed to take
into account the rivalry that was taking place
between the two competing associations, i.e. the
two lobby groups for the Texas
teachers. As a result, when it came time to make
endorsements in my campaign for reelection in
1982, the Texas state teachers quickly endorsed
my opponent. In prior sessions of the
legislature, I had to deal with the issue of how to
get in a timely manner for
computers and computer upgrades needed to do
research at our major research institutions.
Computers were first introduced in Texas state
government. The Appropriations Committee
through the leadership of a previous chairman had
great difficulty in some of the decisions that
some state agencies were making with regards to
acquisition of computers. As a result, riders
were placed in the appropriations bill that made
it rather cumbersome to acquire computers for
state agencies. In most cases, this was not a
serious problem. more of an inconvenience for
those agencies. However, in the case of major
research institutions that were having to
acquire computers and computer upgrades and
software for research purposes, time was of the
essence. and found the process of having to get
approval from both the Texas State Auditor and the
Governor's Office
too time consuming to get the research project
underway as
required by contract with the federal
government. struggling with this problem for
several sessions, I asked for an interim
committee to see if we could not come up with a
better solution with regards to acquisition of
computers. I quickly learned that it was going to
take more time than I had as a part-time legislator
to negotiate the
that needed to be made.
The Speaker of the House recognized this and when
he was approached by a former member of the
legislature who happened to be a member of the
Texas A&M University faculty and was leaving that
post here at A&M,
the Speaker contacted me and asked me if I would put
him to work. staffing this committee that had been
appointed, that I was chairing. I was delighted to
do so, and
Jack Woods, a former member of the Texas House from
Waco, meeting with the state auditor and the
governor's office on numerous occasions, and
keeping me advised of the progress that he was
making. He was able to negotiate a
from them to
a bill that would create a new state agency called
the Automated
Information System Advisory Council. with
appointments being made by the lieutenant
governor, the governor, and the speaker. The
council would be advisory in nature. It was
constitutionally for
the appointments to be made by the three principal
officers in state government. The Information
System Advisory Council was made law by my House
Bill 1463. It was very favorably received by state
agencies. State agencies needed help. in making
acquisitions and found this new agency to be very
helpful in getting the job done. Certainly in
later years, the council has been revamped
and given more power and longer advisory in nature
This is unfortunate and I think has not been in the
best interest of good government that now they
have more power and are more intimidating to state
agencies and as a result not near as helpful. In
1982 during a special session The legislature
finally did away with the old 10 cent ad valorem tax
that was used to fund
state universities and colleges outside of the
permanent university fund. By then that the
courts were going to rule that the ad valorem tax at
state level was unconstitutional because it was
not being uniformly applied across the state.
School districts
appraised their property values at extremely low
rates while others were almost at true market
value. As a result, the ten cent tax being applied
to diverse rates
going to cause the courts to rule the 10 cent tax
unconstitutional. I may have been responsible
for this special session since you will recall
that some two years prior to special session, the
governor had tried to convince me to back off of my
opposition to a constitutional amendment at that
time, which would have abolished the ten cent tax,
which I had no problem with, but at the same time was
giving Prairie View one-third of the permanent
university fund. vehemently opposed and was able
to garner enough opposition votes to keep the
constitutional amendment from getting the
necessary 100 votes.
The special session of 1982, the governor was able
to limit the call that he placed on the legislature
for the special session to subject matter that did
not deal with the permanent university fund
therefore we had a clear up-and-down vote on a
constitutional amendment dealing with the
ten-cent ad valorem tax was during this special
session that for the first time we were
appropriating funds to a number of universities
for
construction directly from general revenue. As
chairman of the House Appropriations Committee,
I found this quite frustrating and dramatic
in that it was very difficult to evaluate the need
for various construction programs around the
state as a member of the legislature who had not
visited all of these facilities and did not have
the expertise to evaluate one project against the
other. Politics became a major factor in deciding
who got the funds in that special session for
construction projects. There was another
situation similar to the regular session in 1977
when the committee got out of hand.
was making appropriations that I did not think
could stand scrutiny and would exceed our budget
that we had set aside for these construction
projects. The outcome was quite different,
however. I was able to let the members add these
items and then, as chairing the conference
committee,
take the items out when we got to the conference
committee level. Some danger in waiting until the
conference committee unless you've had an
opportunity to look at the version of the same bill
or companion bill that the Senate has passed. It
may not be an issue if it's both in the House bill and
the Senate bill and would be very difficult to
remove an item of this nature. wish that I had had
the genius that has been later reflected
in the appropriations bill passed in 1993 where
such items were moved to an article that was not
funded. The members were happy to be in the
appropriations bill even though funds were not
guaranteed for the projects. These were placed in
1993 in Article 11, and some received
appropriations later in conference committee
and some did not. However, if no action was taken
and they were left in Article 11, then they
essentially fell out of the bill without having to
take any action. 1982 was a re-election year that
for the third time in
my career I would have an opponent for
re-election. The opponent had been a previous
employee of the College Station School District,
had been active in the local state senator's
campaign to defeat a long-term incumbent and had
gone to Austin to work on his staff during the
regular session. After the session was over, he
returned to Brazos County and worked for a local
newspaper distributor.
It was an interesting campaign in that my opponent
had spent most of the regular session of 1981 in the
House gallery keeping a tally of how I voted on
various issues. It seemed like almost every day he
had a new issue and kept changing the subject, so to
speak, probably too often to have an effective
campaign. He was able to raise money from around
the state but primarily from other states to fund
his campaign quite adequately. I think that the
opposition really did not expect me to work very
hard since i had been in the legislature for a
number of years and was chairing uh... the most
important committee in the house did not spend as
much time as i had in previous campaigns but did
feel like that i could uh... still conduct a rather
effective campaign on a part-time basis for the
first time I decided to run a poll but did not want to
spend a lot of money bringing in a professional
pollster. I got some help from a professional
pollster as to how to conduct a poll and with a few
volunteers we were
able to get enough information to tell us that we
were leading our opponent by about a two to one
vote. Poster suggested that if I had that kind of
lead that I should simply ignore the attacks of my
opponent and just ride it out until election day.
This is rather easy for a poster to say but it's
difficult to do when you've got members of your
campaign staff who are volunteers and close
friends that are out working for you saying you
need to answer him and you need to be more
aggressive in your you're answering the
opponent's attacks. I decided to answer him in a
very general way as to how easy it was for a
challenger to raise all these issues when he was
not there and was not having to make the decisions
that I, as the office owner, had to make. The polls,
although not very scientific, did
predict about how we were to come out in the race.
Although we lost a lot of the minority boxes, we
ended up with about 65% of the vote in that primary
of 1982. Long about this time that the...
So my family and some friends got together and
organized and chartered Commerce National Bank
in College Station, Texas. This was a national
charter, but I did not think that the public would
distinguish between a national charter where a
state politician would have no influence, and a
state charter where a state politician could have
considerable influence. So I decided that I would
not become a member of the original board of
directors simply to downplay any political
issues. that might accrue because I was serving on
a bank board. It was later when I knew that I would be
leaving the legislature that I became a member of
the board of directors of Commerce National Bank
and College Station. In the summer of 1982, I
decided to take off for a 30-day period and study
for the state bar exam to see if I could get my
license to be a practicing attorney in Texas under
an old law that had been passed many years prior
with the The number of years I had in service as a
member of the Texas legislature, I could sit for
the bar, and if I could pass the exams, I could
become a licensed attorney. Only about four or
five members of the legislature had ever
attempted to pass the bar in such a manner. Of those
that did ultimately pass the exam and was granted a
license, all attended
law school for a period of time, but did not
complete all the requirements to finish law
school. developed that the Speaker of the House
was studying
for the bar at the same time and took the exam on the
same day during that summer of 1982. The Speaker
had
previously announced just a month or so prior to
the time we were studying for the bar that he would
not be a candidate for a statewide elected office.
He had a rather extensive farming operation and
had decided to expand that operation even more
extensively and did not feel like that serving as a
statewide elected official would be compatible
with his financial needs.
At the very last minute, he declined to become a
candidate
for
the General Land Office. 1982 also was a year that
we had a race for Speaker of the House to replace Mr.
Clayton. My deskmate for a number of years,
Gibb Lewis, was a leading candidate for Speaker. I
was not supporting it. Some years before, I had
pledged to support a friend of mine for Speaker if
he ever chose to run. And he had chosen to run and was
opposing my deskmate for Speaker of the House.
when the election was held in January of 1983. Mr.
Lewis understood this, although he would have
liked to have had my support. But I appreciate the
fact that he never pressured me in any way to gain my
support for his candidacy. It was late one Sunday
evening. when I received a call from this friend of
mine who was opposing Gibb Lewis for the
speakership. And he told me that this
candidacy for speaker had rapidly deteriorated
the
last couple of days. I had been out of the state and
wasn't sure what was going on, but sensed that the
wave of support was going in Mr. Lewis's favor.
The Republican contingency in the House was
lining up solidly behind Mr. Speaker. our Mr.
Lewis and would put him over the top for our
speaker. A friend who was opposing Mr. Lewis at the
time suggested that I might want to call Mr. Lewis.
I hung up, the phone rang again and On the other end
was Gib Lewis, who was wanting to visit with me
again about the speaker's race. I told him that I
had just been talking to Mr. Uher, his opponent,
who I was supporting, and that I had been released
of any commitment to him.
Mr. Lewis said that he would be in College Station
the next day, and at that time I signed a pledge card
to support him for Speaker. I realized that I was
getting on the late train and would probably not be
back
in 1983 as chairman of the House Appropriations
Committee. Later that year, when the speaker's
race was all but over, I happened to be on a plane
with Mr. Lewis, and we were flying to Corpus
Christi. This was the first indication that I had
that I would be his appointee for chairman of the
House Appropriations Committee. The way he
approached the subject, he asked me if I had any
ideas about how I wanted to run the House
Appropriations Committee next year. I told him,
as a matter of fact I did, that I felt like it was time
to put the CBOs, the Chairman of Budgets and
Oversights, of the various substantive
committees on the Appropriations Committee.
This would do away with seniority in its entirety
if the rules were written to put the CBOs on the
committee, and this could be a problem to him
politically and one that he would have to deal with
before making that decision. probably want to
talk to some of the senior members that had
supported him for Speaker before making that
move. A few weeks later he called me and we were
talking and he told me that he had decided that was a
good idea and that he would support that change in
the rules that would put the CBOs on the
Appropriations Committee. The downside to this
approach of composing the Appropriations
Committee of CBOs was the fact that the number of
members of the committee had to be expanded from 21
to 28. The addition of seven additional members
did make the committee rather cumbersome. but in
many ways caused a
better information flow to the committee by
having those that had heard detailed
requests from the state agencies sitting on the
Appropriations Committee. A few days prior to the
1983 legislative session convening, my wife and I
decided that we should for the first time take up
residence in Austin during the session and move
family to Austin for the session.
We had one daughter who was then a high school
student and had become involved in
extracurricular activities and was having a
medical problem that the doctors had been unable
to diagnose. by making the move would give her a
clean break with all the high school activities
and give her a chance to readjust to a slower
lifestyle than she had found herself involved in
in a large public high school. We were able to
locate an apartment close to a
church school,
provided all 12 grades. This proved to be good for
our daughter since she did not have the hectic
lifestyle and pace that she had created for
herself in at Bryan High School. It was also good to
be able to come home each evening and have my family
there in Austin. The election of Gibb Lewis,
Speaker, and Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby
returning to his post, the two agreed that each
Monday morning They would have breakfast with the
House Appropriations Committee, myself,
Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee,
Senator Jones, and the two chairmen of the State
Affairs Committees, their respective houses.
The idea was to rotate the breakfast between the
Speaker's apartment and the Lieutenant
Governor's apartment each Monday morning. After
the breakfast meetings were convened, the
Lieutenant Governor's apartment
was destroyed by fire, which almost cost
the state, its entire state capital because of its
construction had not been modernized to the fire
from sweeping through the entire capital. The
fire was contained just in the Lieutenant
Governor's office and apartment and
caused them to vacate those facilities.
Bill Harvey did not live in the apartment himself,
so there was no problem as far as quarters were
concerned. The consequence of the fire The
decision was made that the Monday morning
breakfasts would be held in the speaker's
quarters for the duration of the session. These
meetings were particularly helpful in
developing a strategy for the session and
in getting artists
lined up for the session. The priorities of the
House and the Senate do not always coincide, but it
was good to know what the two houses were thinking
and where there could be agreement and some
resolution worked out on certain major issues.
It was partially as a result of one of those Monday
morning breakfasts that I found myself going to
the hospital and spending a few days for the first
time since I was two years old. This particular
Monday morning, I had arisen a little earlier than
usual and had coffee at the apartment with my wife.
I arrived at the Capitol ahead of everyone else but
for the kitchen help in the Speaker's apartment. I
had time to drink another cup or two of coffee
before the arrival of the Speaker, Lieutenant
Governor, and the other legislators.
During breakfast, I unconsciously drank some
more coffee,
left the meeting and the House Appropriations
Committee for a hearing on the appropriations
request of the Texas A&M University System.
During the hearing, I had time to drink another cup
of coffee and the next thing I knew I was on my way to
the hospital. Took about three days in the
hospital to determine that my heart was in good
condition and that I had no problems. One of the
concerns the doctor had was that I had not had a
check up for quite some time and was not familiar
with my history with regards to my heart. It was
finally determined that I did have a slight heart
murmur, but it had been with me all of my life and was
not anything to be concerned with. With the
exception of the three days I spent in the
hospital, the time
that I spent chairing the Appropriations
Committee was rather pleasant that session. The
conditions was tight, but not extremely so. The
state's economy appeared to still be in good shape
in early 1983. And the revenue projections were
adequate that we did not need to make any
significant reductions. The chair of the Budget
and Oversight Committee did see fit to make 3%
across the board reductions for all of higher
education. And with the exception of some of the
agencies within the Texas A&M University system
did not create a serious problem. It took some
gentle persuasion and education on my part to
convince the chairman of the Budget and Oversight
Committee when he took a 3% reduction of the total
appropriations of an agency that was receiving
only about ten percent of its appropriations from
general revenue that he was cutting general
revenue rather dramatically. Once this was
accomplished we were able to get the bill out of
committee and into conference committee with
some ease. A major issue that the conference
committee had to deal with was the difference in
appropriations methodology for some of the
medical schools at MD Anderson in the University
of Texas system. The chairman of the Budget and
Oversight Committee had reported that rather
significant large sums of unexpended balances
existed within the
medical school budgets of the University of Texas
system. And that there was no reason that we could
not appropriate some of those funds and still
allow them to do the things they wanted to do. The
University of Texas had a different idea, but
apparently decided to leave this issue until the
conference committee met
to work out the differences between the House and
the Senate bills. As we approached the deadline
for finishing the conference committee report on
one Sunday afternoon, this issue still remained
one that the House and the Senate conferees could
not agree upon. In the meantime, Lieutenant
Governor Bill Hobby had come to the conference
committee room and was beginning to work with his
Senate conferees. I immediately called the
Speaker to who was on the golf course, to come to the
Capitol and help us resolve this issue.
We finally had to, by
ourselves, from view of the public and the media,
to have a frank discussion with regards to this
issue. The University of Texas officials
convinced us that they could not live with the
reductions that the House made, but were willing
to make some reductions in those unexpended
balances by allowing us to appropriate them as a
part to replace general revenue. A decision was
made as to what the amounts would be that we would
use from those unexpended balances in the health
science centers. We proceeded back to the
appropriations
committee room to reconvene the conference
committee and take a formal and final vote on the
issue. This, by the way, was the only time that I can
recall that the conference committee did, in
fact, violate the rules and make a tentative
decision in
closed meeting. It became an official meeting
because all the conferees were present at the time
the discussion took place.
The meeting was held in the Lieutenant Governor's
office. Reconvening the conference committee in
the House Appropriations Committee room, I made
the motion that the amount that had been
previously agreed to would be made a part of the
Conference Committee report. The chairman of the
Senate Finance Committee and the chairman of the
Conference Committee took a vote with all five
senators voting for the issue, while on the House
side, I was the only with the other four voting in
the negative. Totally surprised and appalled at
the outcome of the vote, which meant that the issue
was still unresolved. Later explained to me that
the other four conferees had left the meeting in
the Lieutenant Governor's office with the
Speaker and they were still complaining about not
appropriating what the House had originally put
in this bill with regards to these unexpended
balances. The Speaker's response, I was told,
was, well, do whatever you want to. The other four
house conferees agreed to vote against my motion.
The next morning I got the speaker to speak to the
house conferees and tell them that we had to get
this issue resolved and that they needed to vote
for the amounts
that had been agreed upon in Lieutenant
Governor's office. the only unresolved issue in
the bill and we could not report the bill out and get
it passed during the regular session if it was not
resolved very quickly. The Speaker agreed to
speak to the other conferees and the issue was
quickly resolved and for Fourth time in a row, the
biennial appropriations bill was passed with no
new taxes, certified by the comptroller and
signed into law.